

=== Problem ===

--- Page 13 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
1.1 Problem Definition 
 
​
Dance is a timeless representation of art and music expressed through the movement of 
the body. Many young girls turn to dance as a recreational sport or extracurricular activity. Of 
this demographic 81% report injuries within the first year of learning and 58% suffered a 
substantial injury affecting both performance and day to day tasks (Rogier Van Rijin Feb. 2019). 
These injuries can have a cascading effect that can be detrimental to their adult lives.  
 
​
This thesis report will take a look at contemporary dancers, how their injuries occur and 
current methods of injury prevention. The research will be focused on developing a conceptual 
design solution that will reduce the risk of injury. It is also important to keep the solution 
ergonomic and intuitive to use.  
 
1.2 Rationale and Significance 
 
​
The risk of dance injuries for learning students is extremely high with an 81% occurrence 
rate in the first year. It is not uncommon for knee, back and ankle related injuries to severely 
impact an individual's life.  
 
Dance injuries are often overlooked compared to other similar sports injuries. Although 
there is a lot of similarity in the therapy for these injuries, the prevention is often neglected. 
Primary injuries can cascade into long term pain and even disability. How may we reduce the 
risk of injury for learning contemporary dancers? Current aids for dancers look to reduce joint 
strain and often require significant space, or complete re-installation of flooring. Alternative 
13 


=== Personas ===

--- Page 17 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
2.1 User Research  
 
​
This thesis is based on a research topic to be studied using various research methods. The 
research topic being looked at is to look at ways in which injury occurrence in learning dancers 
can be reduced. Resources such as the Humber Library, Google Scholar and other library 
databases will be used.  
 
​
Focus points of information include user demographics, surveys, user needs, full-bodied 
interaction design and benchmarked projects.  
2.1.1 User Profiles / Personas 
 
For the key demographic and user groups, four different personas were recognized. The 
dancers themselves, dance teachers, parents and physiotherapists may be involved in the dancer's 
training. It was important to define four different personas, as their individual needs and 
interactions with the student were very intertwined. Students often find themselves depending on 
parents, teachers and physiotherapists.  
2.1.1.1 Primary User 
 
Name 
Jennifer White 
Age 
15 - 18 
Occupation 
Student/Dancer 
Family 
Parents, one sibling 
Schedule 
Tuesday, Thursday 
Duration 
140 mins, 2 times a week 
Table 1 - Fictitious User Profile 1 
17 

--- Page 18 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
 
​
This fictitious persona is to focus on the user's needs and allow the product developed to 
aid those needs. Based on the research conducted, learning dancers that start to push themselves 
and incur injuries are between the ages of 15 - 18. This is largely due to high school students 
seeking social activities outside of school. Some of the dancers aim to professionally study dance 
after graduating high school.  
2.1.1.2 Secondary User 
 
Name 
Jacqueline Green 
Occupation 
Dance Teacher 
Involvement  
Instructs classes 
Schedule 
Monday - Saturday 
Duration 
12 classes, 140 mins each 
Table 2 - Fictitious User Profile 2 
 
This secondary user has the most amount of interaction with students. It is their role to 
look for injuries before it occurs and ensure safe practice. Dance teachers are also the user group 
looking to push the students the most. Teachers may have to see hundreds of students a week, 
often teaching many classes. A common occurrence is some students being neglected not at the 
fault of the teacher, who may not be able to focus and attend to all the students.  
18 

--- Page 19 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
2.1.1.3 Tertiary User One 
 
Name 
Anna White 
Occupation 
Accountant 
Relationship to Student 
Parent 
Family 
Two Children 
Involvement 
Drops student off 
Table 3 - Fictitious User Profile 3 
 
​
The first of the two tertiary users is the parent. Parents have the most intimate 
relationship with the student. Often parents are asked to buy the student materials and aid in 
ensuring the student is able to attend class. Their budget as such is an important factor when 
checking the feasibility of solutions.  
2.1.1.3.1 Tertiary User Two 
 
Name 
Jasmine Orville 
Occupation 
Physiotherapist  
Relationship to Student 
Helps with injury prevention 
Table 4 - Fictitious User Profile 4 
 
 
 
Physiotherapists act as yet another tertiary user. Physiotherapists may help students better 
understand how muscles move or help provide relief for cramps amongst other aids. In the event 
of an injury, physiotherapists often help rehabilitate the user.  
19 


=== Needs ===

--- Page 32 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
3.1 Needs Analysis 
 
​
This section will look at the three categories of needs for a user. Wants and  wishes, latent 
needs and immediate needs were charted out to define potential goals for the product developed.  
 
Wants + Wishes 
Latent Needs 
Immediate Needs 
Parental Support 
Better indicators of movement 
Consistency in practice 
Fun Activity Potential 
Communication between teacher 
and therapist 
Feedback from the teacher 
Access to Environment 
 
Attentiveness to all 
students 
Table 13 - Needs Analysis 
 
3.1.1 Needs / Benefits Not Met by Current Products 
 
Current products do not meet the needs of communication and indication. Generally, 
most products do not have any exciting aspects to them as well.In interviews with a teacher, a 
common need expressed is to be able to view and assist all the students equally, which was a 
challenge due to the large class sizes.  
3.1.2 Latent Needs 
 
Communication was one of the more notable needs mentioned in interviews and research 
articles. Being able to have a direct dialogue between the personas allows for a more thorough 
understanding for the student. The therapist to teacher interaction seemed to lack intimacy the 
most.  
32 

--- Page 33 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
 
Falling in a similar category as communication, teachers find themselves watching students' 
movements very closely to look for indicators that may cause potential injury. One issue is 
teachers don't have a way of checking through every student. Solutions that either portray 
indicators much more clearly or allow the teachers to review and search for indicators seem 
much needed.  
 
3.1.3 Categorization of Needs 
 
Figure 4 - Categorization of Needs 
 
 
 
33 


=== MindMap ===

--- Page 46 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
4.1 Initial Idea Generation 
 
​
The approach to idea generation started with understanding the user needs, existing 
products and the environment in which the products are used. Common possible injuries were 
also mapped out to understand where issues occurred. Ideas were initially kept broad to come up 
with a variety of potential solutions. 
4.1.1 Mind Mapping
 
Figure 9 - Mind Mapping General 
46 

--- Page 47 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
 
Figure 10 - Mind Mapping Injuries 
 
47 


=== Ideation ===

--- Page 48 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
4.1.2 Ideation Sketches 
 
Portable Dance Barre 
 
Figure 11 - Ideation 1 
 
 
Ankle and Knee Braces 
 
Figure 12 - Ideation 2 + 3 
 
48 

--- Page 49 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
4.2 Concept Exploration 
​
Taken forward from the ideations, the legging concept, the ankle exercise device and 
floor panels were further developed. The conceptualisation of how these devices function, and 
how the user may set them up is shown here. One component in this current stage of 
development that is of concern is the hip-mounted control module. It poses a minor threat to 
moveability and shifting the device could cause the leggings to disconnect with the method of 
attachment demonstrated in Figure 14.  
4.2.1 Concept One 
 
Figure 13 - Concept Leggings 
 
 
Figure 14 - Concept Leggings Controller 
49 

--- Page 50 ---
Bachelor of Industrial Design​
         Augmented Dance Education         Tiam B Morrow-Rogers 
 
4.2.2 Concept Two 
​
Concept 2 where the floor panel was derived from was initially not a smart 
device, however it fully built a dance environment including the dance barre.  
 
Figure 15 - Concept Environment Building 
4.2.3 Concept Three 
 
Figure 16 - Concept Exercise 
50 
